On the scope of McMillan's formula [17 min, 50 s]

(1) Title slide [40 s]

Hello. Thank you for attending the presentation of my master's thesis

    On the scope of McMillan's formula.

My talk is organized as follows [sidebar]:

[1]   After giving a short motivation,

[3a]  I will derive the equations which make up the Eliashberg theory of
      superconductivity, as well as their most common approximations,

[2]   from the fundamental interaction of electrons and phonons.

[3b]  On this basis, I will introduce McMillan's approximate Tc formula.

[4,5] In the second part, I will mainly present some numerical results,
      both for the case of a single and multiple electronic bands.

[6]   Finally, I will conclude with the most important findings and mention
      possible subjects of further investigations.

(2) Motivation [50 s]

McMillan's formula has been introduced in 1968 and gives critical temperatures
of superconductors as a function of three scalar parameters:

    - an average phonon frequency,
    - the electron-phonon coupling strength, and
    - the so-called Coulomb pseudo-potential,

which will be defined on the following slides.

It constitutes an approximation to the more general Eliashberg theory of
superconductivity, established only eight years earlier.

The question is now:

   Where does McMillan's formula possibly fail?

taking the Eliashberg theory as the benchmark for validation.

Hereby, special attention is paid to

   - exceptional densities of states at the Fermi level, and
   - multi-band or anisotropic interactions.

Since McMillan's formula expects scalar parameters,
the latter question is equivalent to the search for effective scalar couplings,
which yield the same critical temperatures as their multi-band counterparts.

(3) Electron phonon interaction [55 s]

Conventional superconductivity results from an effective attraction between
electrons which is mediated by phonons.

In BCS theory this is modeled by an instantaneous electron-electron interaction.

The Eliashberg theory also takes the retardation into account.

Therefore, the starting point is the electron-phonon interaction.

These four Feynman diagrams depict all processes involving one phonon,
which contribute to the renormalization of an electron.

Solid and wavy lines represent non-interacting or 'free' electrons and phonons,
'k' and 'q' denote their momenta and 'tau' is a time parameter.
All quantum numbers and time parameters are summed or integrated over.

[top left]  This process is instantaneous and only affects the single-particle
            energies.

[below]     These two diagrams are disconnected.
            Such are cancelled by the partition function of the system.

[top right] Now one is left with this exchange diagram.

To predict the real behavior of an interacting electron,
all possible processes have to be taken into account.

(4) Hedin's equations [50 s]

This is done by solving these integral equations, known as Hedin's equations.

They are strongly coupled and could be to be iterated till self-consistency.
In practice one has to apply certain approximations.

    - Double lines represent renormalized electrons and phonons.

    - The self-energy 'Sigma' occurring in the electronic Dyson equation
      contains all diagrams which may not be split removing one free electron.

    - The polarization 'Pi' is the corresponding self-energy for the phononic
      Dyson equation.

    - The vertex 'Gamma' contains everything which can mediate a phonon-induced
      electron transition.

According to Migdal's theorem, vertex corrections can be neglected in the
electron-phonon system.

This yields the so-called GW approximation.
The name stems from the symbols 'G' and 'W' for the Green functions which
represent the double electron and interaction lines.

(5) What about superconductivity? [60 s]

Absorbing the Hartree diagram into the single-particle energies one is left with
this Dyson equation.

Formally, the involved quantities are electronic and bosonic Green functions,
which are defined as time-ordered expectations values of ladder operators in the
free or interacting system.

They describe the behavior of test particles which are put into the interacting
system at one time, and removed at another.

However, the present formalism is not sufficient to describe superconductivity.

[>] An anomalous Gor'kov Green function is needed which gives the correlation of
    an electron and its time-reversed counterpart, which may form a Cooper pair.

    In the normal state is vanishes, not so in the superconducting state.
    Hence, is is a suitable order parameter.

[>] Considering all processes which conserve the direction of the arrows,
    the Dyson equation has to be modified and supplemented by another one.

    At the very right, the direction of the arrows is swapped.

[>] For these quantities two more Dyson equations have to be taken into account.

(6) Nambu formalism [60 s]

As found by Nambu in 1960, the four Dyson equations can be compactly formulated
as a matrix equation, if the involved matrices are defined like this.

The self-energy matrix is usually decomposed into a linear combination of unit
and Pauli matrices.

On the imaginary axis, it takes this form, where 'omega_n' are Matsubara
frequencies.

[>] 'Z' is an energy renormalization function,
[>] 'phi' the order parameter, and
[>] 'chi' an energy shift.

[>] The free Green function matrix is known in advance.
    It depends on the single particle energies.

[>] Taking the renormalization through the self-energy into account,
    it changes like this.

[>] The Feynman rules yield an analytic expression for the self-energy in terms
    of the Green functions.

    - 'D' represents the phonon Green function,
    - 'g' is the matrix element of the electron phonon coupling, and
    - 'N' is the number of unit cells.

[>] Now, the Eliashberg equations follow directly from a coefficient comparison.

(7 - 11) Eliashberg equations (2.75 min)

(7) Eliashberg equations 1: Anisotropic equations [50 s]

The Eliashberg theory consists of three coupled equations for

    - the renormalization function,
    - the order parameter, and
    - the energy shift

The right-hand sides features summations over both momenta and frequencies,
as well as a common denominator.

[>] Analogous to the electron-phonon coupling,
    one can introduce the repulsive Coulomb interaction between electrons.

    For the normal state, it is assumed to be already contained in the
    dispersion relation.

    For the superconducting state, an additional contribution is considered
    within a static screening approximation.

[>] Usually, the interaction is rewritten in terms of coupling strengths
    proportional to the density of states at the Fermi level of the free system.

    The uppercase 'N' denotes the full density of states,
    the lowercase 'n' denotes the density of states per unit cell.

[>] As a first, rather rough approximation, the interaction is assumed to be
    local. Then the wave-number indices can be dropped.

(8) Eliashberg equations 2: Local approximation [10 s]

[>] The summation over 'q' can now be replaced by an energy integral,
    weighted with the density of states.

This is one formulation of the Eliashberg equation to be used later.

(9) Eliashberg equations 3: CDOS approximation [50 s]

[>] A second approximation consists of the rather unphysical assumption that the
    density of states is constant over the whole range of integration.

[>] This may be acceptable, because only the density of states near the Fermi
    level contributes significantly.

    - The gray curve is the density of states of a square tight-binding lattice,
      which only serves as an example.
    - The red curve is an exemplary integrand in the Eliashberg equations.
    - The yellow curve is the corresponding integrand in the CDOS approximation.

[>] Now, the density of states only enters through the definition of the
    coupling strengths.

[>] The integrals over Lorentz-like curves can thus be performed analytically.

    The center of mass of a symmetric Lorenz curve vanishes and so does 'chi'.

[>] The remaining equations can be rewritten with the energy gap which opens up
    in the superconducting state and is nothing but 'phi' divided by 'Z'.

This is another formulation of the Eliashberg equations to be used later.

(10) Eliashberg equations 4: Linearized equations [30 s]

[>] At the critical temperature, the order parameter is negligible relative to
    the frequency in the denominator.

This yield the linearized form of the equations used to determine Tc.

'Z' does no longer depend on 'Delta' and may be calculated in advance.

For 'Delta' one is left with a simple eigenvalue equation.

The critical temperature is defined as the highest temperature at which the
greatest eigenvalue of the kernel crosses unity.

(11) Eliashberg equations 5: Multi-band equations [25 s]

[>] In a last step the equations are generalized again, namely with respect to
    multiple electronic bands or Fermi-pocket resolved anisotropy.

    At the former positions of the wave numbers one simply introduces the
    indices 'i' and 'j'.

For example, these equations may be used if the Fermi surface can be grouped
into regions for which effective inter- and intra-region coupling strengths can
be defined.

(12) McMillan's formula [90 s]

The starting point for the derivation of McMillan's formula are the linearized
Eliashberg equations within the approximation of a constant density of states,
analytically continued to the real axis.

To obtain an approximate analytic expression for the critical temperature,
a trail frequency-dependence for the energy gap is used,
namely a step function which takes different values at low and high frequencies.

Enforcing self-consistency at zero and infinite frequency yields this formula.

    - '<omega>' is an average phonon frequency,
    - the parameter 'lambda' is nothing but the intercept of the
      frequency-dependent quantity, and
    - the Coulomb pseudo-potential is a reduced variant of the quantity
      occurring in the Eliashberg equations.
      'E_F' is the Fermi energy and 'omega_0' the maximum phonon frequency.

[>] The formula is now relaxed by introducing three fit parameters 'A', 'B' and
    'C', which are determined via linear regression of Eliashberg results.

[>] Originally, McMillan used the phonon density of states of niobium for his
    calculations.

[>] Throughout this work, however, an Einstein spectrum is used to which the
    formula may be likewise adapted.

[>] The linear regression is performed in two steps:

    First, 'ln(A)' and 'B' are determined as intercept and slope.

[>] Secondly, 'C' is determined as the slope of a line with intercept unity.

    McMillan's original data points and lines of best fit are printed in blue,
    the corresponding quantities for an Einstein spectrum in red.

    By McMillan's formula, all data points should lie on straight lines.

(13) Rescaling the Coulomb interaction [80 s]

In order to solve the imaginary-axis Eliashberg equations on a computer,
it is necessary to truncate the summation over Matsubara frequencies.

Let 'N' index the corresponding cutoff frequency.

For the phonon part this is unproblematic, 'lambda' decays rapidly with
increasing frequency.

The Coulomb interaction, however, must be rescaled to obtain consistent results.

[>] This figure shows the convergence of the critical temperature with the
    cutoff frequency both with and without rescaling.
    The density of states of a square-lattice at quarter-filling is assumed.

    With rescaling, the convergence is much faster.

[>] For the special case of a rectangular density of states the formula for the
    rescaled Coulomb pseudo-potential reduces to this expression.

    It may be rewritten using the Coulomb pseudo-potential from McMillan's
    formula.

[>] This expression does not depend on the electronic bandwidth, which may also
    go towards infinity.

    This is nothing but the CDOS approximation for which a rescaling formula can
    be obtained which relates the pseudo-potentials for two different cutoffs.

    Consequently, the natural cutoff of the CDOS equations is at a frequency
    similar to the virtual electronic bandwidth.

[>] The corresponding convergence plot reveals that the critical temperature
    does not converge without rescaling.

(14) Square lattice [30 s]

As mentioned before, the density of states of a square tight-binding lattice is
used as a recurring example.

On this slide you can see the unit cell, Hamilton operator, dispersion relation
and density of states of the lattice.

't' is the nearest-neighbor hopping parameter, 'R' and 't' are lattice and
translation vectors.

The density of states features a logarithmic van Hove singularity and decays
spontaneously at the edges.

(15) Self-energy [90 s]

In the following, exemplary solutions of the Eliashberg equations are presented
component-wise.

The above panel displays the frequency-dependent order parameter for different
temperatures.

It is bell-shaped, centered around the origin and decays towards a negative
constant determined by the strength of the Coulomb interaction.

This shape is given for all temperatures, but the magnitude decreases towards
the critical point.

In the lower panel the temperature dependence is shown in more detail.

    - The black curve is the gap at the first Matsubara frequency,
    - the orange one shows the gap which is actually measured in experiments.

Both curves coincide largely and resemble the corresponding BCS result.

The number of iterations till self-consistency is found to be enhanced near the
critical point.

[>] If one is also interested in the behavior on the real axis,
    it is necessary to analytically continue the results.

    However, since an analytic expression is not know, it is necessary to
    interpolate the imaginary axis results with a rational function.

[>] This analytic continuation by means of Pade approximants yield this curve.
    The self-energy is no longer real, except below the phonon frequency,
    at which it features a peak.

    The asymptotes are the same as on the real axis.

Similar results may be obtained for the

[>] renormalization function and
[>] energy shift.

The sign of the latter changes dependent on the slope of the density of states.

(16) Critical-temperature benchmarks [30 s]

Now, the critical temperatures according to local and CDOS Eliashberg theory as
well as the original and the adjusted McMillan's formula are compared.

The overall agreement is very good.

The dependence of Tc on the phonon frequency is linear.
Both 'omegaE' and 'lambda' favor superconductivity, 'mu*' opposes it.

However, McMillan's equation fails for large values of 'lambda',
which is a well-known fact.

It predicts an upper bound which does not occur in Eliashberg theory.

(17) Energy dependence [60 s]

These figures show the influence of the shape of the density of states on the
critical temperature, which is determined by scanning the whole energy domain by
varying the free chemical potential with respect to which the coupling strengths
are defined. Note that the coupling strength are held constant.

[top]    In the upper panel, the density of states itself is displayed.

[middle] In the middle you can see the leading value of the energy shift and
         the self-consistent chemical potential, which partly compensate each
         other.

[bottom] In the lower panel the critical temperature is shown as a function of
         the free chemical potential.

It becomes evident that near the van Hove singularity and the band edges the
coupling strength and thus the critical temperature is overestimated.

In the vicinity of the Fermi level there are less states than promised.

This is a problem inherent in the definition of the coupling strengths.

(18) Multi-band order parameters [70 s]

Let's turn to the multi-band case. For simplicity a two-band system is
considered within the CDOS approximation and without Coulomb potential.

In the case of intra-band coupling alone, the two bands may be considered as
two separate superconductors with their own critical temperatures.

As soon as the inter-band coupling is switched on, the situation changes.

In the upper and lower panel the influence of the first on the second band and
vice versa is switched on. Note, that this coupling is not bidirectional.

Both are limiting cases which may not be realized with real densities of states,
but are most instructive for pointing out the dependencies.

In both cases the shape of the curve belonging to the influencing band becomes
apparent in the curve belonging to the influenced band.

In the lower case the curve extends towards the end of the other curve.
This immediately yields a common critical temperature, which remains constant.

In the upper case this results in a sharp bend at the lower critical
temperature. The upper critical temperature, which associated with the system as
a whole, is diminished.

This already suggests that a coupling matrix and any simple average of its
elements do not yield the same critical temperature in general.

(19) Effective scalar coupling strengths [100 s]

To apply McMillan's equation to the multi-band case it is necessary to map the
coupling matrices onto effective scalar coupling strengths.

Hence, a scalar 'lambda' is searched for which yields the same critical
temperature as a coupling matrix.

Here, two approximate mappings are presented for vanishing 'mu*'.

    (1) The first mapping would be exact if the the renormalization were unity.

        In this case, the effective scalar coupling strength is simply the
        greatest eigenvalue of the coupling matrix.

        For two bands one obtains the well known expression for the largest
        eigenvalue of a 2 x 2 matrix.

    (2) The second mapping is exact if only one Matsubara frequency is taken
        into account.

        Here, the effective scalar coupling strength is the greatest eigenvalue
        of twice the coupling matrix, where the row sums are subtracted from the
        diagonal.

        For two bands one obtains this expression.

The quality of the two mappings is tested for 500 coupling matrices the elements
of which are random samples from a uniform distribution over the interval from
zero to one, preselected by the criterion that their maximum eigenvalue is not
less than one half, in order to prevent very low critical temperatures which are
accompanied by a high computational workload.

[>] The critical temperatures corresponding to the approximate scalar and the
    original matrix are plotted against each other.

    The first mapping does never overestimate the critical temperature -- on the
    contrary in most of the cases. The average absolute error is found to be
    2.2 K.

    The second mapping yields more accurate results. For the selected sample,
    there is a coupling strength for which it becomes exact. Below and above
    that it tends to under- and overestimate the critical temperature. The
    average absolute error is only 0.3 K.

(20) Conclusion and outlook [40 s]

Now I will briefly sum up the most important findings.

[good] Local and CDOS Eliashberg theory are principally consistent with
       McMillan's formula.

[bad]  For strong electron-phonon couplings the critical temperature is
       underestimated.

[bad]  The coupling strength is overestimated near van Hove singularities and
       band edges

[bad]  Beyond CDOS, 'mu*' has to be handled with care.

[good] Approximate mappings from coupling matrices onto effective scalar
       coupling strengths have been found.

Future investigations could focus on the description of real materials.

Therefor it may be necessary to take the full k-dependence and a
frequency-dependent Coulomb interaction into account.
